---
title: Mini-Project 6
subtitle: Building Web pages
summary: |
  In this assignment, you will write programs that generate (or attempt to generate) Web pages using templates and ata sets.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this assignment. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your responses.  You
  may also consult with the normal host of other folks: Mentors, tutors,
  SamR, Grinnell CS students, random strangers on the Web, and so
  on and so forth.  If you receive help from anyone, make sure to
  cite them in your responses. You do not need to cite course pages
  you were instructed to read for this assignment.
link: true
notes: |
  This needs *significant* rewriting.  It may also need more starter
  code.
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

Please name your file [`html-generation.rkt`](../code/mps/html-generation.html).  The file name is a link to the starter code.

## Background

Many Web pages are not written by hand.
Rather, they are generated automatically by a program that grabs data from one place and fits it into a template.
Of course, someone has often written the template by hand.
And someone has written the program that puts the data in a usable format.
And, um, someone has written the program that puts data into the template.

In this project, you will write a program that builds new Web pages by substituting text from one file into another file.

## The big picture

Write a procedure, `(build-page data template result)`, that takes three strings as parameters and uses them to build a Web page.
`data` names an XML file that contains data (which will be surrounded by the `data` tag).
`template` names an XML file that contains the template.
`result` is the name of the file that your procedure should create.

The template will primarily by HTML (well, XHTML, but it's close enough) along with two special singleton tags.

* The `element` tag grabs an element from the data file.  For example,
  `<element id="foo"/>` should grab the contents of the element named
  `foo`.  One can also specify a field from the element with
  `field="NAME"`.  For example, `<element id="prof" field="last-name">`
  should grab the field named `last-name`.
* The `random` tag grabs a random element of a particular type from
  the data file.  Types can be specified by their outermost tag with
  `tag="TAG"`, by their class, with `class="CLASS"`, or by both.
  Once again, we can include a `field` attribute to grab one field.

For example, here's a very simple data file for our class.

```
<data>
  <name id="prof" class="professor"><first>Samuel</first> <middle>Alexander</middle> <last>Rebelsky</last> <nickname>SamR</nickname></name>
  <name id="river" class="mentor"><first>River</first> <middle>B</middle> <last>Lake</last> <nickname>River</nickname></name>
  <name id="elle" class="mentor"><first>Lindsey</first> <middle>L</middle> <last>Lasty</last> <nickname>Elle</nickname></name>
  <topic id="recursion" class="fun">Recursion</topic>
  <topic id="vectors" class="mutable">Vectors</topic>
</data>
```

Here's a template for a randomly generated topic.

```
<p>I'm taking CSC-151 from Professor <element id="prof" field="last"/>.
Our mentors are <element id="elle" field="nickname"/> and
<element id="river" field="nickname"/>.
When <element id="prof" field="nickname"/>'s presentation of
<random tag="topic"/> is too confusing, I go to 
<random class="mentor" field="nickname"/> for help.</p>
```

That should become something like this.

```
<p>I'm taking CSC-151 from Professor Rebelsky.  Our mentors are Elle
and River.  When SamR's presentation of Recursion is too confusing, I go to
Elle for help.</p>
```

It could also become something like the following.

```
<p>I'm taking CSC-151 from Professor <last>Rebelsky</last>.  Our mentors are 
<nickname>Elle</nickname> and <nickname>River</nickname>.  When <nickname>SamR</nickname>'s presentation of Recursion is too confusing, I go to
<nickname>Elle</nickname> for help.</p>
```

That is, you can keep tags if you feel it's easier to do so.

---

## Tips and notes

You may assume that every element in the data file has an id.

You may assume that no element in the data file has more than one class.

You will likely want to decompose the problem into parts.
For example, for testing and checking, you will find it useful to write a procedure that takes the SXML for the template (and a hash table or SXML for the data) as parameters and returns the new SXML.
You might also want to handle the two kinds of tags separately.
That is, you would have one procedure for `element` tags and one for `random` tags.

To earn an E, you'll need to permit data that includes `element` and
`random` tags.  (That is not necessary for an M.)

## Evaluation

We will primarily evaluate your work on *correctness* (does your code
compute what it's supposed to and are your procedure descriptions
accurate); *clarity* (is it easy to tell what your code does and how
it acheives its results; is your writing clear and free of jargon);
and *concision* (have you kept your work short and clean, rather than
long and rambly).  In a few cases, we will also consider the
*creativity* of your result.

## Rubric

### General

```
[ ] Passes all the one-star tests (*)
[ ] File named correctly (`html-generation.rkt`) (*)
[ ] File "runs" correctly in DrRacket (*)
[ ] Reformatted code with Ctrl-I before submitting (*)
[ ] If the program references other files, those files were submitted (*)
[ ] If the program references other files, it does so with the base file name, rather than a complex path (*)
[ ] Introductory header comment with name, date, assignment, course, citations (*)

[ ] Passes all the two-star tests (**)
[ ] All procedures are documented, including helpers (**)
[ ] Code is generally formatted/indented correctly (**)
[ ] Program is decomposed sensibly (**)

[ ] Passes all the three-star tests (***)
[ ] Almost no stylistic issues (***)
[ ] Avoids expensive repeated work (***)
[ ] Clear variable names (***)
```

### Assignment-specific

[ ] Appropriately replaces `element` tags (**)
[ ] Appropriately replaces `random` tags (**)

[ ] Handles `element` tags in the data file (***)
[ ] Handles `random` tags in the data file (***)

[ ] Handles missing data (****)

## Questions and Answers

Do you anticipate this taking under four hours?

> I hope so.

Will you provide more guidance on XPath patterns?

> Just a bit.

> If you want a tag with a particular id, you can use `//*[@id='ID']`,
  substituting the id for `ID`.

> If you want more info, the Web is a wonderful thing.

Can we assume that the template and the data are valid XML?

> Certainly.

How would you decompose the problem?

> I would write a helper that takes the pre-processed data and pre-processed
  template.  Then the main procedure would read the two input files,
  process them as necessary, pass them to the helper, take the response,
  and write it to the result file.

> I would have separate procedures to deal with the `element` tags and the
  `random` tags.  For example, `(process-elements data template)` and
  `(process-random data template)`.

> For the one that deals with elements, I would to iterate over all of 
  the `element` tags, replacing each tag with the appropriate information
  from the data.  That sounds like a task for `sxpath-replace`.

> I'll need a procedure to turn an element tag into the corresponding
  information from data.  I'll call that `extract-element`.  To extract
  that information, I'll need the data and the element tag.  What does
  `extract-element` do?  It grabs the id from the element tag.  It uses
  that to look up the appropriate element from the data.  Perhaps it
  extracts a field.  Then it returns the result.

> I suppose extracting a field from the result is a good helper to
  `extract-by-id`.

Could you remind me how `sxpath-replace` works?

> `(sxpath-replace pattern xml proc)` is, in some ways, a lot like
  `map`.  It finds every occurence of `pattern` in `xml`, calls
  `proc` on each occurence, and shoves the results back into the XML.

`sxpath-replace` needs a one parameter procedure that gets called on
each tag.  But `extract-element` needs two parameters.  What should
I do?

> Use `section`?

When you say "pre-processed data", how would you pre-process the data?

> I might just leave it as SXML.

> I might shove data into hash tables (e.g., using the id as the key).

> I might build structures.

Can I assume that the only data we care about is at the top level of
the data file, immediately within `data` tags?

> Yes.

Can I assume that the data elements all have an id attribute and a class attribute?

> Yes.

Can I assume that the attributes will be in the order id, then class, then anything else?

> For an M, yes.

> For an E, no.  You'll need to find the id whatever order things appear.

I'm having trouble decomposing.  Can you suggest some procedures?

> A lot of what we're doing is searching the data.  I'd write procedures
  that search the data.

> * `(extract-elements-by-tag tag data)`
> * `(extract-elements-by-class class data)`
> * `(extract-element-by-id id data)` (Note that this is singular.)
> * `(extract-field field xml)` (Grab the first element with a particular tag.)

> We also have to extract information from `element` and `random` tags.

> * `(extract-class element)`
> * `(extract-tag element)`
> * `(extract-id element)`
> * `(extract-fieldname element)`

Can you help me write `extract-element-by-id`?

> Sure.

> We'll use `sxpath-match`.  That returns a list of all matching things.
  The list should contain zero or one elements.  (Zero means no matches;
  One is the one match.)

> Our pattern should be something like `"//*[@id='ID']"`, where we fill
  in the appropriate id.

> So

> ```
;;; (id-pattern id) -> string?
;;;   id : string?
;;; Build the pattern to match a particular id.  E.g., `(id-pattern "prof")`
;;; should give `"//*[@id='prof']"`.
(define id-pattern
  (lambda (id)
    (string-append "//*[@id='" id "']")))
```

> Once we search with that pattern, we'll get back a list of elements.
  If the id does not appear, that list will be empty.  Ideally, the
  id will appear exactly one, so we'll have a list of one element and
  we'll extract that element with `car`.

> ```
;;; (extract-element-by-id id data) -> xml? or false?                          
;;;   id : string?
;;;   data : xml
;;; Find the element in data with a given id.  If there is no such
;;; element, return false.
(define extract-element-by-id
  (lambda (id data)
    (let ([elements (sxpath-match (id-pattern id) data)])
      ; `elements` is either the empty list or a list of one element
      (and (not (null? elements))
           (car elements)))))
```
