---
title: Mini-Project 7
subtitle: Open-ended project
summary: |
  Do something cool.
collaboration: |
  You may work in teams of up to four students.
  You may certainly consult others in developing the project, although
  you should cite or acknowledge them if you have done so.
link: true
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

## The basics

Form a team of between one and four students.

Decide upon a project.

Build the project, spending about six hours per person outside of class.
(You will also have some time in class to work on the project.)

Submit the project.

Present the project.

## A bit more detail

We have learned a wide variety of techniques for working with
text this semester.  For example,

* We can extract information on pieces of text using regular
  expressions, string operations, and such.
* We can visualize both quantitative and textual information
  using the Racket image tools.
* We can generate text using templates (e.g., Madlibs), randomized
  techniques, and statistical techniques.
* We can manipulate and build Web pages using the SXML tools and
  by recursing over SXML structures.

You now have the opportunity to work with other students to apply 
them to a moderate-sized project of your choice.  You can choose
the technique or techniques you apply.  You can choose your data
source or sources.  All we ask is that you do something that 
someone will find interesting.  Well, we also ask that you keep
your time commitment reasonable, about six hours per team member
of out-of-class time (plus the presentation), which should be three
hours per week.

## What to submit

* Your project, in the file `project.rkt`.
* A log of how each group member spent their time on the project
  (in fifteen-minute increments), in the file `timelog.txt`.
* Sample output from your project, in file or files of your choices.
* Any other files we would need to run the project.

### Sample Time Log

```
Taylor  2022-05-07     09:00-09:15     Found relevant Web pages
Taylor  2022-05-07     09:15-09:30     Started writing `mungify`
Taylor  2022-05-07     09:30-09:45     Wrote tests for `mungify`
Taylor  2022-05-08     17:00-17:15     Met with group
Taylor  2022-05-08     17:15-17:30     Finished writing `mungify`
Taylor  2022-05-10     12:00-12:15     Looked for collections of words for sentiment analysis
>>>>>>> main
...
```

### Presentations

Your group will give a 5--10 minute presentation to the class on Monday, 9 May 2022 or Wednesday, 11 May 2022.
There may also be other audience members present from outside our class.

In your presentation, you should make sure to show off the results of your project and to discuss any particularly interesting code you wrote.

## Sample projects

_The following are not intended as restrictive; rather, they are to help you consider kinds of things you might do._

You might identify a series of reports (e.g., fires at national forests) and visualize the series data.

You might write a program that generates a word cloud for an arbitrary Web page.

You might write a program that generates a particular form of poetry, such as villanelles.

You might write a program that conducts sentiment analysis on each paragraph of a Web page and re-styles those paragraphs depending on the sentment of the paragraph.

## Time-boxing and the "Minimum Viable Product" approach

As you've likely learned by now, it can be difficult to predict how long it will take to write a program.
Hence, we encourage you to take a _minimum viable product_ approach to this project.
That is, identify the simplest possible version of the project, build that, and then add features as you go.

For example, if you were doing the "word cloud" project above, you might start with a program that takes an ordered list of word/appearances pairs and makes an image of the first ten words stacked above each other.

Once that works, you might add: resizing words, based on the number of appearances; recoloring words (randomly?); changing orientation; going from Web page to ranked list of words; etc., etc. 

Note that once you've hit about five hours per person outside of class on the code, you should start wrapping up the code and start working on the presentation.
We'd rather see working code that does less than non-working code that does more.

## Warning!

There are no redos on this project.
Whatever grade you get the first time through is the grade you get.
If you do not turn in a time log, you will not pass the project.

## Not quite self checks

### Self check 1: Potential projects (‡)

Write a short paragraph about a project you'd like to develop.
What kind of data would you use?
What programming approaches/tools would you use?

### Self check 2: Skills (‡)

Make a list of skills that you think the various members of the group
should have in order to create a successful project.  For example, while
you can all code (I hope), you might also benefit from someone who is
good at managing groups, someone who is good at writing, etc.

## Rubric

_This rubric is approximate.  Our goal is that if you do the work and follow good habits, you should get an M._

### Required for M

```
[ ] All necessary files included
[ ] Project runs and produces correct output on most inputs
[ ] Documentation describes goals of project, what was achieved, and how to run it
[ ] Time log appears reasonable
[ ] Presentation between 5 and 10 minutes
[ ] Presentation includes both results and underlying code
[ ] Answered questions well
[ ] Code correctly formatted (a few mistakes are permissible)
```

### Required for E

```
[ ] One or more of the following, at the discretion of the grader.
    [ ] A particularly nice procedure or piece of code (please describe in documentation)
    [ ] A particularly valuable, clever, or innovative project
    [ ] An outstanding, nearly flawless, presentation
[ ] All procedures documented
[ ] Almost no inefficient or otherwise bad code
[ ] Documentation clear and well orgnized
```
